Add fonts best practices (#5530)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/fast/font-best-practices/index.md

---
layout: post
title: Best practices for fonts
subhead: |
  Optimize web fonts for Core Web Vitals.
authors:
  - katiehempenius
date: 2021-06-03
hero: image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/T4kc8pjG9mvfZwynORjM.jpg
alt: A photo of letterpress type.
description: |
  Learn about how to optimize web fonts for Core Web Vitals.
tags:
  - blog
  - performance
  - web-vitals
---

This article discusses performance best practices for fonts. There are a variety
of ways in which web fonts impact performance:

*   **Delayed text rendering:** If a web font has not loaded, browsers typically
    delay text rendering. In many situations, this delays [First Contentful

>     Paint (FCP)](http://web.dev/fcp). In some situations, this delays [Largest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Paint (FCP)](/fcp). In some situations, this delays [Largest
```

>     Contentful Paint (LCP)](https://web.dev/lcp/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Contentful Paint (LCP)](/lcp/). 
```

*   **Layout shifts:** The practice of font swapping has the potential to [cause
    layout

>     shifts](https://web.dev/debug-layout-shifts/#identifying-the-cause-of-a-layout-shift).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    shifts](/debug-layout-shifts/#identifying-the-cause-of-a-layout-shift).
```

    These layout shifts occur when a web font and its fallback font take up
    different amounts of space on the page.

This article is broken down into three sections: font loading, font delivery,
and font rendering. Each section explains how that particular aspect of the font

> lifecycle "works" and provides corresponding best practices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lifecycle works and provides corresponding best practices.
```

## Font loading

Before diving into best practices for font loading it's important to understand
how [`@font-face`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face)
works and how this impacts font loading.

The [`@font-face`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face)
declaration is an essential part of working with any web font. At a minimum, it
declares the name that will be used to refer to the font and indicates the
location of the corresponding font file.

```css
@font-face {
  font-family: "Open Sans";
  src: url("/fonts/OpenSans-Regular-webfont.woff2") format("woff2");
}
```

A common misconception is that a font is requested when a `@font-face`

> declaration is encountered - this is not true. By itself, `@font-face`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
declaration is encountered—this is not true. By itself, `@font-face`
```

declaration does not trigger font download. Rather, a font is downloaded only if
it is referenced by styling that is used on the page. For example, like this:

```css
@font-face {
  font-family: "Open Sans";
  src: url("/fonts/OpenSans-Regular-webfont.woff2") format("woff2");
}

h1 {
  font-family: "Open Sans"
}
```

In other words, in the example above, `Open Sans` would only be downloaded if
the page contained a `<h1>` element.

{% Aside %}
    Other ways of loading a font are the
    [`preload`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Preloading_content)
    resource hint and the [Font Loading

>     API](https://web.dev/optimize-webfont-loading/#the-font-loading-api).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    API](/optimize-webfont-loading/#the-font-loading-api).
```

{% endAside %}

Thus, when thinking about font optimization, it's important to give stylesheets
just as much consideration as the font files themselves. Changing the contents
or delivery of stylesheets can have a significant impact on when fonts arrive.
Similarly, removing unused CSS and splitting stylesheets can reduce the number
of fonts loaded by a page.

### Best practices

> Fonts are typically important resources - without them the user might not be
> able to view page content. Thus, best practices for font loading generally focus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fonts are typically important resources, as without them the user might be
unable to view page content. Thus, best practices for font loading generally focus
```

If your site loads fonts from a third-party site, it is highly recommended that
you use the
[`preconnect`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Link_types/preconnect)
resource hint to establish an early connection with the third-party origin.
Resource hints should be placed in the `<head>` of the document.

```html

<head>
  <link rel="preconnect" href="https://fonts.com">
</head>

```

{% Aside %}

[Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/) provides the option to load fonts via
`<link>` tags or an `@import` statement. The `<link>` code snippet includes a
`preconnect` resource hint and therefore will likely result in faster stylesheet
delivery than using `@import` version. These `<link>` tags should be placed as
early in the document as possible.

{% endAside %}

#### Avoid using preload to load fonts

Generally speaking, using the
[`preload`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Preloading_content)
resource hint to load fonts should be avoided. Although `preload` is highly
effective at making fonts discoverable early in the page load process, this
comes at the cost of taking away browser resources from the loading of other
resources. 

> In most scenarios, inlining font declarations and adjusting stylesheets will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most scenarios, inlining font declarations and adjusting stylesheets is
```

a more effective approach. These adjustments come closer to addressing the root
cause of late-discovered fonts - rather than just providing a workaround.

In addition, using `preload` as a font-loading strategy should also be used
carefully as it bypasses some of the browser's built-in content negotiation
strategies. For example, `preload` ignores `unicode-range` declarations, and if
used prudently, should only be used to load a single font format.

## Font delivery

Faster font delivery yields faster text rendering. In addition, if a font is
delivered early enough, this can help eliminate layout shifts resulting from
font swapping.

### Best practices

#### Using self-hosted fonts

> At least on paper, using a self-hosted font should deliver better performance as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On paper, using a self-hosted font should deliver better performance as
```

it eliminates a third-party connection setup. However, in practice, the
performance differences between these two options is less clear cut: for
example, the [Web Almanac](https://almanac.httparchive.org/en/2020/fonts#fig-7)
found that sites using third-party fonts had a faster render than fonts that
used first-party fonts.

If you are considering using self-hosted fonts, confirm that your site is using

> a [Content Delivery Network (CDN)](https://web.dev/content-delivery-networks/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a [Content Delivery Network (CDN)](/content-delivery-networks/)
```

> and [HTTP/2](https://web.dev/content-delivery-networks/#http2-and-http3).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and [HTTP/2](/content-delivery-networks/#http2-and-http3).
```

Without use of these technologies, it is much less likely that self-hosted fonts
will deliver better performance. For more information, see [Content Delivery

> Networks](https://web.dev/content-delivery-networks/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Networks](/content-delivery-networks/).
```

{% Aside %}

If you're unsure if using self-hosted fonts will deliver better performance, try
serving a font file from your own servers and compare the transfer time
(including connection setup) with that of a third-party font. If you have slow
servers, don't use a CDN, or don't use HTTP/2 it becomes less likely that the
self-hosted font will be more performant.

{% endAside %}

If you use a self-hosted font, it is recommended that you also apply some of the
font file optimizations that third-party font providers typically provide

> automatically - for example, font subsetting and WOFF2 compression. The amount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
automatically—for example, font subsetting and WOFF2 compression. The amount
```

of effort required to apply these optimizations will depend somewhat on the
languages that your site supports. In particular, be aware that optimizing fonts
for [CJK languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CJK_characters) can be
particularly challenging.

> *  **Unicode-range and font subsetting:** `@font-face` is often used in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Unicode-range and font subsetting:** `@font-face` is often used in
```

    `unicode-range` is often used in conjunction with the technique of
    subsetting. A subset font includes a smaller portion of the
    [glyphs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glyph) (that is, characters) that
    were contained in the original font file. For example, rather than serve all
    characters to all users, a site might generate separate subset fonts for
    Latin and Cyrillic characters. The number of glyphs per font varies wildly:
    Latin fonts are usually on the magnitude of 100 to 1000 glyphs per font;
    [CJK](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CJK_characters) fonts may have over
    10,000 characters. Removing unused glyphs can significantly reduce the
    filesize of a font.

    Tools for generating font subsets include
    [subfont](https://github.com/Munter/subfont) and
    [glyphanger](https://github.com/zachleat/glyphhanger).

    For information on how Google Fonts implements font subsetting, see this
    [presentation](https://www.unicodeconference.org/presentations-42/S5T3-Sheeter.pdf).
    For the Google Fonts API subsets, see this
    [repo](https://github.com/googlefonts/gftools/tree/main/Lib/gftools/encodings).

> *  **WOFF2:** Of the modern font fonts, [WOFF2](https://www.w3.org/TR/WOFF2/) is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**WOFF2:** Of the modern font fonts, [WOFF2](https://www.w3.org/TR/WOFF2/) is
```

   the newest, has the widest browser support, and offers the best compression.
   Because it uses Brotli, WOFF2 compresses 30% better than WOFF.

#### Use fewer web fonts

The fastest font to deliver is a font that isn't requested in the first place.
System fonts and variable fonts are two ways to potentially reduce the number of
web fonts used on your site.

> *  **System fonts:** A system font is the default font used by the user
>    interface of a user's device. System fonts typically vary by operating system
>    and version. Because the font is already installed, the font does not need to
>    be downloaded. System fonts can work particularly well for body text. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **system font** is the default font used by the user
interface of a user's device. System fonts typically vary by operating system
and version. Because the font is already installed, the font does not need to
be downloaded. System fonts can work particularly well for body text. 
```

To use the system font in your CSS, list `system-ui` as the font-family:

```css
font-family: system-ui
```

> *  **Variable fonts:** The idea behind [variable
>    fonts](https://web.dev/variable-fonts/) is that a single variable font can be
>    used as a replacement for multiple font files. Variable fonts work by
>    defining a "default" font style and providing
>    ["axes"](https://web.dev/variable-fonts/#axes-definitions) for manipulating
>    the font. For example, a variable font with a `Weight` axis could be used to
>    implement lettering that would previously require separate fonts for light,
>    regular, bold, and extra bold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The idea behind **[variable
 fonts](/variable-fonts/)** is that a single variable font can be
 used as a replacement for multiple font files. Variable fonts work by
 defining a "default" font style and providing
 ["axes"](/variable-fonts/#axes-definitions) for manipulating
 the font. For example, a variable font with a `Weight` axis could be used to
 implement lettering that would previously require separate fonts for light,
 regular, bold, and extra bold.
```

{% Aside %}

We often refer to "Times New Roman" and "Helvetica" as fonts. However,
technically speaking, these are typefaces. A typeface is composed of fonts -
each of these fonts represents a particular variation of the typeface (for
example, italics, regular, bold). A font file contains a single font.

{% endAside %}

> Not everyone will benefit from switching to variable fonts. [Variable
> fonts](https://web.dev/variable-fonts/) typically have larger file sizes than
> non-variable fonts. Sites that will see the largest improvement from using
> variable fonts are sites that use (and need to use) a variety of font styles and
> weights.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not everyone will benefit from switching to variable fonts. [Variable
fonts](/variable-fonts/) typically have larger file sizes than
non-variable fonts. Sites that will see the largest improvement from using
variable fonts are sites that use (and need to use) a variety of font styles and
weights.
```

## Font rendering

When faced with a web font that has not yet loaded, the browser is faced with a
dilemma: should it hold off on rendering text until the web font has arrived? Or
should it render the text in a fallback font until the web font arrives?

Different browsers handle this scenario differently. By default, Chromium-based
and Firefox browsers will block text rendering for up to 3 seconds if the
associated web font has not loaded; Safari will block text rendering
indefinitely.

This behavior can be configured by using the `font-display` attribute. This
choice can have significant implications: `font-display` has the potential to
impact LCP, FCP, and layout stability.

### Best practices

#### Choose an appropriate `font-display` strategy

[`font-display`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-display)
informs the browser how it should proceed with text rendering when the
associated web font has not loaded. It is defined per font-face.

```css
@font-face {
  font-family: Roboto, Sans-Serif
  src: url(/fonts/roboto.woff) format('woff'),
  font-display: swap;
}
```

There are five possible values for `font-display`:

> <table>
>   <tr>
>    <td><strong>Value</strong>
>    </td>
>    <td><strong>Block period</strong>
>    </td>
>    <td><strong>Swap period</strong>
>    </td>
>   </tr>
>   <tr>
>    <td>Auto
>    </td>
>    <td>Varies by browser
>    </td>
>    <td>Varies by browser
>    </td>
>   </tr>
>   <tr>
>    <td>Block
>    </td>
>    <td>3 seconds
>    </td>
>    <td>Infinite
>    </td>
>   </tr>
>   <tr>
>    <td>Swap
>    </td>
>    <td>0ms
>    </td>
>    <td>Infinite
>    </td>
>   </tr>
>   <tr>
>    <td>Fallback
>    </td>
>    <td>100ms
>    </td>
>    <td>3 seconds
>    </td>
>   </tr>
>   <tr>
>    <td>Optional
>    </td>
>    <td>100ms
>    </td>
>    <td>None
>    </td>
>   </tr>
> </table>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div class="w-table-wrapper">
<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>Value</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>Block period</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>Swap period</strong>
   </td>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr>
   <td>Auto
   </td>
   <td>Varies by browser
   </td>
   <td>Varies by browser
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>Block
   </td>
   <td>3 seconds
   </td>
   <td>Infinite
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>Swap
   </td>
   <td>0ms
   </td>
   <td>Infinite
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>Fallback
   </td>
   <td>100ms
   </td>
   <td>3 seconds
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>Optional
   </td>
   <td>100ms
   </td>
   <td>None
   </td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
</div>
```
